Belgium (/ˈbɛldʒəm/ (About this sound listen)),[A] officially the Kingdom of Belgium, is a country in Western Europe bordered by France, the Netherlands, Germany and Luxembourg. 
A small and densely populated country, it covers an area of 30,528 square kilometres (11,787 sq mi) and has a population of more than 11 million. 
Belgium is home to two main linguistic groups: Dutch-speaking Flemish people and French-speaking Walloons, as well as a small group of German speakers who live in the East Cantons. 
Historically, Belgium lay in the area known as the Low Countries, a somewhat larger area than the current Benelux group of states that also included parts of Northern France and Western Germany. 
The region was called Belgica in Latin, after the Roman province of Gallia Belgica. 
From the end of the Middle Ages until the 17th century, the area of Belgium was a prosperous and cosmopolitan centre of commerce and culture. 
From the 16th century until the Belgian Revolution in 1830, when Belgium seceded from the Netherlands, the area of Belgium served as the battleground between many European powers, causing it to be dubbed the "Battlefield of Europe",[8] a reputation strengthened by both world wars. 
Belgium is a federal constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary system of governance. 
It is divided into three highly autonomous regions[9] and three communities, that exist next to each other. 
Its two largest regions are the Dutch-speaking region of Flanders in the north and the mostly French-speaking southern part of the Wallonia region. 
The Brussels-Capital Region is an officially bilingual (French and Dutch) enclave within the Flemish Region.[10] A German-speaking Community exists in eastern Wallonia. 
Belgium's linguistic diversity and related political conflicts are reflected in its political history and complex system of governance, made up of six different governments. 
Belgium participated in the Industrial Revolution[15][16] and, during the course of the 20th century, possessed a number of colonies in Africa. 
The second half of the 20th century was marked by rising tensions between the Dutch-speaking and the French-speaking citizens fueled by differences in language and culture and the unequal economic development of Flanders and Wallonia. 
This resulted in a transition from a unitary to a federal arrangement during the period from 1970 to 1993. 
Despite the reforms, tensions between the groups have remained, if not increased; there is significant separatism particularly among the Flemish; controversial language laws exist such as the municipalities with language facilities;[18] and the formation of a coalition government took 18 months following the June 2010 federal election, a world record. 
Unemployment in Wallonia is more than double that of Flanders, which boomed after the war. 
Belgium is one of the six founding countries of the European Union and hosts the official seats of the European Commission, the Council of the European Union, and the European Council, as well as a seat of the European Parliament in the country's capital, Brussels. 
Belgium is also a founding member of the Eurozone, NATO, OECD, and WTO, and a part of the trilateral Benelux Union and the Schengen Area. 
Brussels hosts several of the EU's official seats as well as the headquarters of many major international organizations such as NATO. 
Belgium is a developed country, with an advanced high-income economy. 
The country achieves very high standards of living, life quality,[21] healthcare,[22] education,[23] and is categorized as "very high" in the Human Development Index. 
A gradual immigration by Germanic Frankish tribes during the 5th century brought the area under the rule of the Merovingian kings. 
A gradual shift of power during the 8th century led the kingdom of the Franks to evolve into the Carolingian Empire. 
The Treaty of Verdun in 843 divided the region into Middle and West Francia and therefore into a set of more or less independent fiefdoms which, during the Middle Ages, were vassals either of the King of France or of the Holy Roman Emperor. 
Many of these fiefdoms were united in the Burgundian Netherlands of the 14th and 15th centuries. 
Emperor Charles V extended the personal union of the Seventeen Provinces, making it far more than a personal union by the Pragmatic Sanction of 1549 and increased his influence over the Prince-Bishopric of Liège. 
The Eighty Years' War (1568–1648) divided the Low Countries into the northern United Provinces (Belgica Foederata in Latin, the "Federated Netherlands") and the Southern Netherlands (Belgica Regia, the "Royal Netherlands"). 
The latter were ruled successively by the Spanish (Spanish Netherlands) and the Austrian Habsburgs (Austrian Netherlands) and comprised most of modern Belgium. 
This was the theatre of most Franco-Spanish and Franco-Austrian wars during the 17th and 18th centuries. 
Following the campaigns of 1794 in the French Revolutionary Wars, the Low Countries—including territories that were never nominally under Habsburg rule, such as the Prince-Bishopric of Liège—were annexed by the French First Republic, ending Austrian rule in the region. 
The reunification of the Low Countries as the United Kingdom of the Netherlands occurred at the dissolution of the First French Empire in 1815, after the defeat of Napoleon. 
In 1830, the Belgian Revolution led to the separation of the Southern Provinces from the Netherlands and to the establishment of a Catholic and bourgeois, officially French-speaking and neutral, independent Belgium under a provisional government and a national congress. 
The universal suffrage for men was introduced after the general strike of 1893 and for women in 1949. 
The main political parties of the 19th century were the Catholic Party and the Liberal Party, with the Belgian Labour Party emerging towards the end of the 19th century. 
French was originally the single official language adopted by the nobility and the bourgeoisie. 
It progressively lost its overall importance as Dutch became recognized as well. 
This recognition became official in 1898 and in 1967 the parliament accepted a Dutch version of the Constitution. 
The Berlin Conference of 1885 ceded control of the Congo Free State to King Leopold II as his private possession. 
From around 1900 there was growing international concern for the extreme and savage treatment of the Congolese population under Leopold II, for whom the Congo was primarily a source of revenue from ivory and rubber production. 
Many Congolese were killed by Leopold's agents for failing to meet production quotas for ivory and rubber. 
It is estimated that nearly 10 million were killed during the Leopold period. 
In 1908, this outcry led the Belgian state to assume responsibility for the government of the colony, henceforth called the Belgian Congo. 
A Belgian commission in 1919 estimated that Congo's population was half what it was in 1879. 
Germany invaded Belgium in August 1914 as part of the Schlieffen Plan to attack France, and much of the Western Front fighting of World War I occurred in western parts of the country. 
The opening months of the war were known as the Rape of Belgium due to German excesses. 
Belgium assumed control of the German colonies of Ruanda-Urundi (modern-day Rwanda and Burundi) during the war, and in 1924 the League of Nations mandated them to Belgium. 
In the aftermath of the First World War, Belgium annexed the Prussian districts of Eupen and Malmedy in 1925, thereby causing the presence of a German-speaking minority.