Michael Joseph Jackson (August 29, 1958 – June 25, 2009) was an American singer, songwriter, and dancer. 
Michael made his professional debut in 1964 with his elder brothers Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, and Marlon as a member of the Jackson 5. 
He began his solo career in 1971 while at Motown Records. 
In the early 1980s, Jackson became a dominant figure in popular music. 
The popularity of these videos helped bring the television channel MTV to fame. 
Jackson's 1987 album Bad spawned the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles "I Just Can't Stop Loving You", "Bad", "The Way You Make Me Feel", "Man in the Mirror", and "Dirty Diana", becoming the first album to have five number-one singles in the nation. 
He continued to innovate with videos such as "Black or White" and "Scream" throughout the 1990s, and forged a reputation as a touring solo artist. 
Through stage and video performances, Jackson popularized a number of complicated dance techniques, such as the robot and the moonwalk, to which he gave the name. 
His distinctive sound and style has influenced numerous artists of various music genres. 
Thriller is the best-selling album of all time, with estimated sales of over 66 million copies worldwide. 
Jackson's other albums, including Off the Wall (1979), Bad (1987), Dangerous (1991), and HIStory (1995), also rank among the world's best-selling albums. 
He is one of the few artists to have been inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice, and was also inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame and the Dance Hall of Fame as the only dancer from pop and rock music. 
His other achievements include multiple Guinness World Records including the Most Successful Entertainer of All Time,[7][8] 13 Grammy Awards, the Grammy Legend Award, the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award, 24 American Music Awards—more than any other artist—including the "Artist of the Century", 13 number-one singles in the United States during his solo career—more than any other male artist in the Hot 100 era—and estimated sales of over 350 million records worldwide. 
Jackson won hundreds of awards, making him the most awarded recording artist in the history of popular music. 
He became the first artist in history to have a top ten single in the Billboard Hot 100 in five different decades when "Love Never Felt So Good" reached number nine in 2014. 
Jackson is also remembered for his philanthropy and pioneering efforts in charitable fundraising in the entertainment industry. 
He traveled the world attending events honoring his humanitarianism, and, in 2000, the Guinness World Records recognized him for supporting 39 charities, more than any other entertainer. 
In 2005, he was tried and acquitted of further child sexual abuse allegations and several other charges after the jury found him not guilty on all counts. 
Jackson died of acute propofol and benzodiazepine intoxication on June 25, 2009, after suffering from cardiac arrest. 
The Los Angeles County Coroner ruled his death a homicide, and his personal physician, Conrad Murray, was convicted of involuntary manslaughter. 
Jackson's death triggered a global outpouring of grief, and a live broadcast of his public memorial service was viewed around the world. 
Forbes ranked Jackson as the top-earning deceased celebrity for the fifth consecutive year in 2017. 
His estate earned $825 million in 2016, the highest yearly amount ever recorded by the publication. 
Michael Joseph Jackson was born in Indiana on August 29, 1958. 
He was the eighth of ten children in the Jackson family, a working-class African-American family living in a two-bedroom house on Jackson Street in Gary. 
His mother, Katherine Esther Jackson (née Scruse), left the Baptist tradition in 1963 to become a devout Jehovah's Witness. 
She played clarinet and piano and once aspired to be a country-and-western performer, but worked part-time at Sears to support the family. 
His father, Joseph Walter "Joe" Jackson, a former boxer, was a steelworker at U.S. Steel. 
Joe performed on guitar with a local rhythm and blues band, the Falcons, to supplement the family's income. 
Despite being a convinced Lutheran, Joe also participated in his wife's faith as did all their children. 
His father's great-grandfather, July "Jack" Gale, was "a Native American medicine man and an US Army scout. 
"Michael grew up with three sisters (Rebbie, La Toya, and Janet) and five brothers (Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, Marlon, and Randy). 
A sixth brother, Marlon's twin Brandon, died shortly after birth. 
Jackson had a troubled relationship with his father. 
In 2003, Joe acknowledged that he regularly whipped him as a boy. 
Joe was also said to have verbally abused his son, often saying that he had a "fat nose". 
Jackson stated that he was physically and emotionally abused during incessant rehearsals, though he credited his father's strict discipline with playing a large role in his success. 
In an interview with Martin Bashir for the 2003 documentary Living with Michael Jackson, Jackson recalled that Joe often sat in a chair with a belt in his hand as he and his siblings rehearsed, and that "if you didn't do it the right way, he would tear you up, really get you. 
"Jackson's parents have disputed the longstanding allegations of abuse, with Katherine stating that while whipping is considered abuse today, it was a common way to discipline children at the time. 
Jackie, Tito, Jermaine and Marlon have also said that their father was not abusive and that the whippings, which were harder on Michael because he was younger, kept them disciplined and out of trouble. 
Speaking openly about his childhood in an interview with Oprah Winfrey broadcast in February 1993, Jackson acknowledged that his youth had been lonely and isolating. 
His deep dissatisfaction with his appearance, his nightmares and chronic sleep problems, his tendency to remain hyper-compliant, especially with his father, and to remain childlike in adulthood are consistent with the effects of the maltreatment he endured as a child. 
In 1964, Michael and Marlon joined the Jackson Brothers—a band formed by their father which included brothers Jackie, Tito, and Jermaine—as backup musicians playing congas and tambourine. 
In 1965, Michael began sharing lead vocals with his older brother Jermaine, and the group's name was changed to the Jackson 5. 
The following year, the group won a major local talent show with Jackson performing the dance to Robert Parker's 1965 hit "Barefootin'". 
From 1966 to 1968 they toured the Midwest, frequently performing at a string of black clubs known as the "chitlin' circuit" as the opening act for artists such as Sam & Dave, the O'Jays, Gladys Knight, and Etta James. 
The Jackson 5 also performed at clubs and cocktail lounges, where striptease shows and other adult acts were featured, and at local auditoriums and high school dances. 
The Jacksons won a weekly amateur night concert at the Apollo Theater in Harlem. 
The Jackson 5 recorded several songs, including their first single "Big Boy" before signing with Motown in 1969. 
They left Gary in 1969 and relocated to Los Angeles, where they continued to record music for Motown. 
Rolling Stone later described the young Michael as "a prodigy" with "overwhelming musical gifts" who "quickly emerged as the main draw and lead singer. 
"The group set a chart record when its first four singles—"I Want You Back" (1969), "ABC" (1970), "The Love You Save" (1970), and "I'll Be There" (1970)—peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100. 
During this period, Michael evolved from child performer into a teen idol. 
As Jackson began to emerge as a solo performer in the early 1970s, he maintained ties to the Jackson 5 and Motown. 
Between 1972 and 1975, Michael released four solo studio albums with Motown: Got to Be There (1972), Ben (1972), Music & Me (1973), and Forever, Michael (1975). 
"Got to Be There" and "Ben", the title tracks from his first two solo albums, became successful singles, as did a cover of Bobby Day's "Rockin' Robin". 
The Jackson 5 were later described as "a cutting-edge example of black crossover artists. 
"Although the group's sales began to decline in 1973, and the members chafed under Motown's refusal to allow them creative input, they achieved several top 40 hits, including the top five single "Dancing Machine" (1974), before leaving Motown in 1975. 
In June 1975, the Jackson 5 signed with Epic Records, a subsidiary of CBS Records,[55] and renamed themselves the Jacksons. 
Younger brother Randy formally joined the band around this time, while Jermaine chose to stay with Motown and pursue a solo career. 
The Jacksons continued to tour internationally, and released six more albums between 1976 and 1984. 
Michael, the group's lead songwriter during this time, wrote hits such as "Shake Your Body (Down to the Ground)" (1979), "This Place Hotel" (1980), and "Can You Feel It" (1980). 
It costarred Diana Ross, Nipsey Russell, and Ted Ross.[57] The film was a box-office failure. 
Its score was arranged by Quincy Jones, whom Jackson had previously met when he was 12 at Sammy Davis Jr.'s house. 
Jones agreed to produce Jackson's next solo album. 
During his time in New York, Jackson frequented the Studio 54 nightclub and was exposed to early hip hop, influencing his beatboxing on future tracks such as "Working Day and Night". 
In 1979, Jackson broke his nose during a complex dance routine. His subsequent rhinoplasty was not a complete success; he complained of breathing difficulties that would affect his career. 
He was referred to Dr. Steven Hoefflin, who performed Jackson's second rhinoplasty and subsequent operations. 
Jackson's fifth solo album, Off the Wall (1979), co-produced by Jackson and Jones, established Jackson as a solo performer. 
The album helped Jackson transition from the bubblegum pop of his youth to the more complex sounds he would create as an adult. 
Songwriters for the album included Jackson, Rod Temperton, Stevie Wonder, and Paul McCartney. 

The album reached number three on the Billboard 200 and eventually sold over 20 million copies worldwide. 
In 1980, Jackson won three awards at the American Music Awards for his solo efforts: Favorite Soul/R&B Album, Favorite Soul/R&B Male Artist, and Favorite Soul/R&B Single for "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough". 
He also won Billboard Year-End awards for Top Black Artist and Top Black Album, and a Grammy Award for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance for 1979 with "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough". 
In 1981 Jackson was the American Music Awards winner for Favorite Soul/R&B Album and Favorite Soul/R&B Male Artist. 
Despite its commercial success, Jackson felt Off the Wall should have made a bigger impact, and was determined to exceed expectations with his next release. 
In 1980, he secured the highest royalty rate in the music industry: 37 percent of wholesale album profit. 
Jackson recorded with Queen singer Freddie Mercury from 1981 to 1983. 
The recordings were intended for an album of duets but, according to Queen's then-manager Jim Beach, the relationship between the singers soured when Jackson insisted on bringing a llama into the recording studio. 
The collaborations were not officially released until 2014. 
Jackson went on to record the single "State of Shock" with Mick Jagger for the Jacksons' album Victory (1984). 
Mercury included the solo version of "There Must Be More To Life Than This" on his Mr. Bad Guy album (1985). 
In 1982, Jackson combined his interests in songwriting and film when he contributed the song "Someone in the Dark" to the storybook for the film E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial. 
The song, with Jones as its producer, won a Grammy for Best Recording for Children for 1983.