World War II was a global war that lasted from 1939 to 1945, although related conflicts began earlier. 
The vast majority of the world's countries—including all of the great powers—eventually formed two opposing military alliances: the Allies and the Axis. 
It was the most global war in history; it directly involved more than 100 million people from over 30 countries. 
In a state of total war, the major participants threw their entire economic, industrial, and scientific capabilities behind the war effort, blurring the distinction between civilian and military resources. 
World War II was the deadliest conflict in human history, marked by 50 to 85 million fatalities. 
It included massacres, the genocide of the Holocaust, strategic bombing, starvation, disease, and the only use of nuclear weapons in warfare. 
From late 1939 to early 1941, in a series of campaigns and treaties, Germany conquered or controlled much of continental Europe, and formed the Axis alliance with Italy and Japan. 
Under the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of August 1939, Germany and the Soviet Union partitioned and annexed territories of their European neighbours, Poland, Finland, Romania and the Baltic states. 
The war continued primarily between the European Axis powers and the coalition of the United Kingdom and the British Commonwealth, with campaigns including the North Africa and East Africa campaigns, the aerial Battle of Britain, the Blitz bombing campaign, and the Balkan Campaign, as well as the long-running Battle of the Atlantic. 
On 22 June 1941, the European Axis powers launched an invasion of the Soviet Union, opening the largest land theatre of war in history, which trapped the major part of the Axis military forces into a war of attrition. 
In December 1941, Japan attacked the United States and European colonies in the Pacific Ocean, and quickly conquered much of the Western Pacific. 
The Axis advance halted in 1942 when Japan lost the critical Battle of Midway. 
In 1943, with a series of German defeats on the Eastern Front, the Allied invasion of Sicily and the Allied invasion of Italy which brought about Italian surrender, and Allied victories in the Pacific, the Axis lost the initiative and undertook strategic retreat on all fronts. 
In 1944, the Western Allies invaded German-occupied France, while the Soviet Union regained all of its territorial losses and invaded Germany and its allies. 
During 1944 and 1945 the Japanese suffered major reverses in mainland Asia in South Central China and Burma, while the Allies crippled the Japanese Navy and captured key Western Pacific islands. 
The war in Europe concluded with an invasion of Germany by the Western Allies and the Soviet Union on 8 May 1945. 
Following the Potsdam Declaration by the Allies on 26 July 1945 and the refusal of Japan to surrender under its terms, the United States dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on 6 and 9 August respectively. 
With an invasion of the Japanese archipelago imminent, the possibility of additional atomic bombings and the Soviet invasion of Manchuria, Japan formally surrendered on 2 September 1945. 
Thus ended the war in Asia, cementing the total victory of the Allies. 
World War II changed the political alignment and social structure of the world. 
The United Nations (UN) was established to foster international co-operation and prevent future conflicts. 
The victorious great powers—China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States—became the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. 
The Soviet Union and the United States emerged as rival superpowers, setting the stage for the Cold War, which lasted for the next 46 years. 
Meanwhile, the influence of European great powers waned, while the decolonisation of Africa and Asia began. 
Most countries whose industries had been damaged moved towards economic recovery. 
Political integration, especially in Europe, emerged as an effort to end pre-war enmities and to create a common identity. 
The start of the war in Europe is generally held to be 1 September 1939, Britain and France declared war on Germany two days later. 
The dates for the beginning of war in the Pacific include the start of the Second Sino-Japanese War on 7 July 1937,[11][12] or even the Japanese invasion of Manchuria on 19 September 1931. 
Others follow the British historian Alan John Percivale Taylor, who held that the Sino-Japanese War and war in Europe and its colonies occurred simultaneously and the two wars merged in 1941. 
This article uses the conventional dating. 
Other starting dates sometimes used for World War II include the Italian invasion of Abyssinia on 3 October 1935. 
The British historian Antony Beevor views the beginning of World War II as the Battles of Khalkhin Gol fought between Japan and the forces of Mongolia and the Soviet Union from May to September 1939. 
The exact date of the war's end is also not universally agreed upon. 
The war ended with the armistice of 14 August 1945 (V-J Day), rather than the formal surrender of Japan, which was on 2 September 1945. 
A peace treaty with Japan was signed in 1951. 
A treaty regarding Germany's future allowed the reunification of East and West Germany to take place in 1990 and resolved other post-World War II issues. 
World War I had radically altered the political European map, with the defeat of the Central Powers—including Austria-Hungary, Germany, Bulgaria and the Ottoman Empire—and the 1917 Bolshevik seizure of power in Russia, which eventually led to the founding of the Soviet Union. 
Meanwhile, the victorious Allies of World War I, such as France, Belgium, Italy, Romania and Greece, gained territory, and new nation-states were created out of the collapse of Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman and Russian Empires. 
To prevent a future world war, the League of Nations was created during the 1919 Paris Peace Conference. 
The organisation's primary goals were to prevent armed conflict through collective security, military and naval disarmament, and settling international disputes through peaceful negotiations and arbitration. 
Despite strong pacifist sentiment after World War I,[19] its aftermath still caused irredentist and revanchist nationalism in several European states. 
These sentiments were especially marked in Germany because of the significant territorial, colonial, and financial losses incurred by the Treaty of Versailles. 
Under the treaty, Germany lost around 13 percent of its home territory and all of its overseas possessions, while German annexation of other states was prohibited, reparations were imposed, and limits were placed on the size and capability of the country's armed forces. 
The German Empire was dissolved in the German Revolution of 1918–1919, and a democratic government, later known as the Weimar Republic, was created. 
The interwar period saw strife between supporters of the new republic and hardline opponents on both the right and left. 
From 1922 to 1925, the Fascist movement led by Benito Mussolini seized power in Italy with a nationalist, totalitarian, and class collaborationist agenda that abolished representative democracy, repressed socialist, left-wing and liberal forces, and pursued an aggressive expansionist foreign policy aimed at making Italy a world power, promising the creation of a "New Roman Empire". 
Adolf Hitler, after an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the German government in 1923, eventually became the Chancellor of Germany in 1933. 
He abolished democracy, espousing a radical, racially motivated revision of the world order, and soon began a massive rearmament campaign. 
Meanwhile, France, to secure its alliance, allowed Italy a free hand in Ethiopia, which Italy desired as a colonial possession. 
The situation was aggravated in early 1935 when the Territory of the Saar Basin was legally reunited with Germany and Hitler repudiated the Treaty of Versailles, accelerated his rearmament programme, and introduced conscription. 
To contain Germany, the United Kingdom, France and Italy formed the Stresa Front in April 1935; however, the United Kingdom made an independent naval agreement with Germany, easing prior restrictions. 
The Soviet Union, concerned by Germany's goals of capturing vast areas of Eastern Europe, drafted a treaty of mutual assistance with France. Before taking effect though, the Franco-Soviet pact was required to go through the bureaucracy of the League of Nations, which rendered it essentially toothless. 
The United States, concerned with events in Europe and Asia, passed the Neutrality Act in August of the same year. 
Hitler defied the Versailles and Locarno treaties by remilitarising the Rhineland in March 1936, encountering little opposition. 
In October 1936, Germany and Italy formed the Rome–Berlin Axis. 
A month later, Germany and Japan signed the Anti-Comintern Pact, which Italy would join in the following year.